CLDR-15034 kbd: Keyboard 3.0 Spec (#3111)
unicode-org/cldr: docs/ldml/tr35-keyboards.md

 [longPressDefault="{default longpress target}"]
 [multiTap="{the output on subsequent taps}"]
 [stretch="true"]
 [switch="{layer id}"]
 [to="{the output}"]
 [transform="no"]
 [width="{key width}"]
 /><!-- {Comment to improve readability (if needed)} -->
```

> <small>
>
> Parents: [keys](#Element_keys)
>
> Children: _none_
>
> Occurrence: optional, multiple
> </small>

**Note**: The `id` attribute is required.

**Note**: _at least one of_ `switch`, `gap`, or `to` are required.

_Attribute:_ `id`

> The `id` attribute uniquely identifies the key. NMTOKEN, restricted to `[a-zA-Z0-9_.-]`. It can (but needn't be) the Latin key name for a Latn script keyboard (a, b, c, A, B, C, …), or any other valid token (e-acute, alef, alif, alpha, …)

_Attribute:_ `flicks="flick-id"` (optional)

> The `flicks` attribute indicates that this key makes use of a [`flicks`](#Element_flicks) set with the specified id.

_Attribute:_ `gap="true"` (optional)

> The `gap` attribute indicates that this key does not have any appearance, but represents a "gap" of the specified number of key widths. Can be used with `width` to set a width.

```xml
<key id="mediumgap" gap="true" width="1.5"/>
```

> _Attribute:_ `longPress="a b c"` (optional) (discouraged, see [Accessibility])

Author: I'll remove the 'discouraged' and the link, there's other comments about rewriting the Accessibility section.

> _Attribute:_ `longPress="a b c"` (optional) (discouraged, see [Accessibility])

Author: * Addressed in upcoming PR

> The `longPress` attribute contains any characters that can be emitted by "long-pressing" a key, this feature is prominent in mobile devices. The possible sequences of characters that can be emitted are whitespace delimited. Control characters, combining marks and whitespace (which is intended to be a long-press option) in this attribute are escaped using the `\u{...}` notation.

_Attribute:_ `longPressDefault` (optional)

> Indicates which of the `longPress` target characters is the default long-press target, which could be different than the first element. Ignored if not in the `longPress` list. Characters in this attribute can be escaped using the `\u{...}` notation.
> For example, if the `longPressDefault` is a key whose [display](#Element_displays) appears as `{` an implementation might render the key as follows:
>

> > ![keycap hint](images/keycapHint.png)

Author: pre-existing.

> _Attribute:_ `multiTap` (optional) (discouraged, see [Accessibility])

Author: I'll remove the 'discouraged' and the link, there's other comments about rewriting the Accessibility section.

> _Attribute:_ `multiTap` (optional) (discouraged, see [Accessibility])

Author: * Addressed in upcoming PR

> Also note that `switch=` is ignored for hardware layouts: their shifting is controlled via
> the modifier keys.
>
> This attribute is an NMTOKEN, restricted to `[a-zA-Z0-9-]`

_Attribute:_ `to`

> The `to` attribute contains the output sequence of characters that is emitted when pressing this particular key. Control characters, whitespace (other than the regular space character) and combining marks in this attribute are escaped using the `\u{...}` notation. More than one key may output the same output.

> The `to` attribute may also contain the `\m{…}` syntax to insert a marker. See the definition of [markers](#markers).

_Attribute:_ `transform="no"` (optional)

> The `transform` attribute is used to define a key that never participates in a transform but its output shows up as part of a transform. This attribute is necessary because two different keys could output the same characters (with different keys or modifier combinations) but only one of them is intended to be a dead-key and participate in a transform. This attribute value must be no if it is present.
>

> > For example, suppose there are the following keys, their output and one transform:

Author: Perhaps it should just say "does not participate until the next keystroke"

> > For example, suppose there are the following keys, their output and one transform:

Reviewer: Yep. And perhaps a note that using markers is another way to solve the problem?

> > For example, suppose there are the following keys, their output and one transform:

Author: By the way, a marker that’s never directly consumed, whose purpose may be just to be not-a-character, might need to be noted as far as validation goes.

> > For example, suppose there are the following keys, their output and one transform:

Author: adressed in upcoming PR

3. Also due to the `<display>` element, implementations can opt to display a visible `^` (perhaps visually distinct from a plain `^` carat). Implementations may opt to display nothing and only store the marker in the input context.

4. The user now presses the `e` key, which is also added to the input context. The input context now has:

    - …
    - character `e`
    - marker `circ_marker`

5. Now, the input context matches the transform.  The `e` and the marker are replaced with `ê`.

    The input context now has:

    - …
    - character `ê`

**Effect of markers on final text**

All markers must be removed before text is returned to the application from the input context.
If the input context changes, such as if the cursor or mouse moves the insertion point somewhere else, all markers in the input context are removed.

**Implementation Notes**

Ideally, markers are implemented entirely out-of-band from the normal text stream. However, implementations _may_ choose to map each marker to a [Unicode private-use character](https://www.unicode.org/glossary/#private_use_character) for use only within the implementation’s processing and temporary storage in the input context.

> For example, the first marker encountered could be represented as U+E000, the second by U+E001 and so on.  If a regex processing engine were used, then those PUA characters could be processed through the existing regex processing engine.  `[^\uE000-\uE009]` could be used as an expression to match a character that is not a marker, and `[Ee]\u{E000}` could match `E` or `e` followed by the first marker.

Reviewer: Given our recent discussions on markers in Keyman, I wonder if this advice may be unhelpful/misleading and perhaps we should just leave it to the implementers to figure out how they want to solve? PUA characters could be used by an experimental keyboard for a new orthography, even if that keyboard is not acceptable for publication into CLDR.

Author: ```suggestion
Markers should be implemented out-of-band from the normal text stream. Implementations should take care that all normal Unicode codepoints, including private-use area (PUA), are not affected by any scheme for encoding markers in text.
```

Author: This was implemented when this PR merged.

**Syntax**

```xml
<transform from="{input rule}" to="{output pattern}"/>
```

> <small>
>
> Parents: [transformGroup](#Element_transformGroup)
> Children: _none_
> Occurrence: required, multiple
>
> </small>

_Attribute:_ `from` (required)

> The `from` attribute consists of an input rule for matching the input context.
>
> The `transform` rule and output pattern uses a modified, mostly subsetted, regular expression syntax, with EcmaScript syntax (with the `u` Unicode flag) as its baseline reference (see [MDN-REGEX](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Regular_Expressions)). Differences from regex implementations will be noted.

#### Regex-like Syntax

- **Simple matches**

    `abc` `𐒵`

- **Unicode codepoint escapes**

    `\u1234 \u012A`
    `\u{012a} \u{1234a}`

    The hex escaping is case insensitive. The value may not match a surrogate or illegal character.

>     The form

Reviewer: This looks unfinished

Author: Fixed in upcoming PR, noting that CLDR-16825 proposes removing \u1234 format

- **Fixed character classes and escapes**

    `\s \S \t \r \n \f \v \\ \$ \d \w \D \W \0`

    The value of these classes do not change with Unicode versions.

    `\s` for example is exactly `[\f\n\r\t\v\u00a0\u1680\u2000-\u200a\u2028\u2029\u202f\u205f\u3000\ufeff]`

    `\\` and `\$` evaluate to `\` and `$`, respectively.

- **Character classes**

    `[abc]` `[^def]` `[a-z]` `[ॲऄ-आइ-ऋ]` `[\u093F-\u0944\u0962\u0963]`

    - supported
    - no Unicode properties such as `\p{…}`

>     - Warning: Character classes look superficially similar to UnicodeSets as defined in [`unicodeSet`](#element-unicodeSet) elements, but they are different. UnicodeSets must be defined with a `unicodeSet` element, and referenced with the `$[unicodeSet]` notation in transforms. UnicodeSets cannot be used directly in a transform.

Reviewer: > UnicodeSets cannot be used directly in a transform.

This is slightly confusing -- perhaps we need to say something like:

```suggestion
    - Warning: Character classes look superficially similar to UnicodeSets as defined in [`unicodeSet`](#element-unicodeSet) elements, but they are different. UnicodeSets must be defined with a `unicodeSet` element, and referenced with the `$[unicodeSet]` notation in transforms. UnicodeSets cannot be specified inline in a transform, and can only be used indirectly by reference to the corresponding `unicodeSet` element.
```

Author: Added to upcoming PR

- **Bounded quantifier**

    `{x,y}`

    `x` and `y` are required single digits representing the minimum and maximum number of occurrences.
    `x` must be ≥ 0, `y` must be ≥ x and ≥ 1

- **Optional Specifier**

    `?` - equivalent of `{0,1}`

- **Numbered Capture Groups**

    `([abc])([def])` (up to 9 groups)

    These refer to groups captured as a set, and can be referenced with the `$1` through `$9` operators in the `to=` pattern. May not be nested.

> - **Nested capture groups**

Reviewer: Non-capture groups?

Author: reworded in upcoming PR

    </variables>
    ```

    This expression in a `from=` may be used to **insert a mapped variable**, see below under [Replacement syntax](#replacement-syntax).

#### Disallowed Regex Features

- **Unicode properties**

    `\p{property}` `\P{property}`

    **Rationale:** The behavior of this feature varies by Unicode version, and so would not have predictable results.

    Tooling may choose to suggest an expansion of properties, such as `\p{Mn}` to all non spacing marks for a certain Unicode version.  As well, a set of variables could be constructed in an `import`-able file matching particularly useful Unicode properties.

    ```xml
    <unicodeSet id="Mn" value="[\u034F\u0591-\u05AF\u05BD\u05C4\u05C5\…]" /> <!-- 1,985 code points -->
    ```

- **Backreferences**

    `([abc])-\1` `\k<something>`

    **Rationale:** Implementation and cognitive complexity.

- **Unbounded Quantifiers**

    `* + *? +? {1,} {0,}`

    **Rationale:** Implementation and Computational complexity.

- **Nested capture groups**

    `((a|b|c)|(d|e|f))`

    **Rationale:** Computational and cognitive complexity.

- **Named capture groups**

    `(?<something>)`

>     **Rationale:** Cognitive complexity.

Reviewer: Implementation complexity?

Author: Yes good catch.!

Author: added to upcoming PR

- **Assertions** other than `^`

    `\b` `\B` `(?<!…)` …

    **Rationale:** Implementation complexity.

- **End marker**

    `$`

    The end marker can be thought of as being implicitly at the end of every `from=` pattern, matching the insertion point. Transforms do not match past the insertion point.

_Attribute:_ `to`

> This attribute represents the characters that are output from the transform.
>
> If this attribute is absent, it indicates that the no characters are output, such as with a backspace transform.
>
> A final rule such as `<transform from=".*"/>` will remove all context which doesn’t match one of the prior rules.

#### Replacement syntax

Used in the `to=`

- **Literals**

    `$$ \$ \\` = `$ $ \`

- **Entire matched substring**

>     `*&`

Reviewer: Is this right? not `$0`?

Author: I think you are right. 

```suggestion
    `$0`
```

Author: added to upcoming PR
